# GIMLET
R package for the identification of biological modulators in context-specific gene regulation using local energy statistics

<strong>Depends:</strong>

R(>=3.3.2)

Rcpp, RcppArmadillo

<strong>Authors:</strong>

Teppei Shimamura

<strong>Contact:</strong>
shimamura[at]med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

## Installation:

To install GIMLET package, we start R and run the following codes on R console:

```
library(devtools)
install_github("tshimam/GIMLET")
```

## General overview

We propose a novel method, genome-wide identification of modulators using local energy statistical test (GIMLET), to identify biological modulators that contribute to regulation of given transcription factors.
GIMLET takes data matrix (for example, expression, copy number, and mutation) of regulators, their target genes, and modulators as inputs, and calculates a new dependence measure, called local distance correlation to compare the difference of distance correlation at low and high values of given modulators. Local distance correlation is used for modeling the relationships between regulators and their target genes at the fixed point of modulators. GIMLET caculates a statistical significance whether local distance correlation varies with modulators using a permutation-based approach.

## An example of synthetic data

We show an example of synthetic data where the response network was generated by an additive model of the 30 random networks of 500 nodes (predictors) with signal-to-noise equal to 1 and the first 15 predictors were related with the response.  For details, see the Section 3.1 in the manuscript.

```
library("GIMLET")

n <- 200
junk <- sim1(n,type="linear")
X <- junk$x
Y <- junk$y
Z <- junk$z
obj <- gimlet(X,Y,Z)
obj$global.p.value

```

## Reference
Teppei Shimamura, Yusuke Matsui, Taisuke Kajino, Satoshi Ito, Takashi Takahashi, and Satoru Miyano, GIMLET: Identifying Biological Modulators in Context-Specific Gene Regulation Using Local Energy Statistics, Accepted in CIBB 2007. The extended version will be published in Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics.
